Mediation.
We ran a mediation analysis (PROCESS 
model 4; Hayes 2022) with 5,000 bootstrapped samples, 
using PD (0 ¼ immediate, 1 ¼ delayed) as the independent 
variable, the likelihood of purchasing the espresso machine 
as the dependent variable, and price expectation disconfir­
mation as the mediator. Consistent with hypothesis 2b, the 
indirect effect via price expectation disconfirmation (β ¼
−3.34, SE ¼ 1.42, 95% CI ¼ [−6.40 to −.95]) was 
significant.
Post-Test: Inexpensive-Price Beliefs.
A post-test simi­
lar to those in prior studies was used to confirm delayed 
prices led to an expectation of lower prices. We showed 82 
Prolific participants interested in espresso machines the 
same scenario from study 4’s delayed PD condition. We 
then asked participants, “Imagine you receive an email 
advertising this espresso machine on sale. The e-mail 
advertising does not show the price—you have to click to 
see the deal. Does the fact that you are not seeing the price 
lead you to believe that. . .” (1 ¼ “The price is so low, they 
do not want to initially show it,” to 7 ¼ “The price is so 
high, they do not want to initially show it”). We found that 
the mean score was lower than the midpoint (M ¼ 3.32, t 
(81) ¼ −3.06, p ¼ .003), suggesting that inexpensive-price 
beliefs influenced price expectations in the delayed PD 
condition.
Alternative Explanations.
It is possible that withhold­
ing prices encouraged consumers to make unfavorable 
inferences about product quality or the retailer. Using a 
procedure similar to study 4’s (condition: immediate PD 
vs. delayed PD), we asked 256 people interested in 
espresso machines their perceived product quality and cus­
tomer service expectations (see web appendix D for addi­
tional details). There was no effect of condition on 
perceived product quality (F(1, 254) ¼ 0.829, p ¼ .364) 
and customer service expectations (F(1, 254) ¼ 0.420, p ¼
.517).
Discussion
Study 4 provided evidence consistent with hypothesis 2a 
and hypothesis 2b. In a setting in which information about 
the product and the context of the purchase prompted con­
sumers to believe prices would be inexpensive, delayed PD 
decreased consumers’ intention to buy the product. The 
effect was mediated by unfavorable price expectation dis­
confirmation, suggesting that the inexpensive-price belief 
exerted a stronger influence on expected prices when the 
price was delayed (see distributions A and B in figure 2).
STUDY 5: DELAYING PRICES WITH 
DIFFERENT RETAILER PRICE IMAGE 
BELIEFS
Studies 1 through 4 used post-tests to provide evidence 
for the influence of price beliefs on price expectations and 
purchase behavior. In study 5, we manipulated price beliefs 
associated with store image while trying to keep other sour­
ces of price beliefs constant. There is robust literature 
showing that price beliefs related to store image create 
strong and consistent influences on price expectations 
(Hamilton and Chernev 2013). Thus, we manipulated 
whether prices were delayed or immediately displayed in a 
store known for high prices (i.e., a premium retailer) versus 
low prices (a discount retailer). We anticipated delayed PD 
at a premium (discount) retailer would result in increased 
(decreased) purchase intention owing to more favorable 
(unfavorable) 
price 
expectation 
disconfirmation, 
as 
hypothesized in hypothesis 1a and hypothesis 1b (hypothe­
sis 2a and hypothesis 2b). We also included a national 
retailer condition that was meant to be comparable to the 
department store used in studies 1 and 3. Given that we 
have argued that the mid-tier price positioning of Fravega 
contributed to expensive-price beliefs in study 1, it was 
appropriate to investigate this claim by including a 
“national retailer” condition and showing support for 
hypothesis 1a and hypothesis 1b. These predictions were 
preregistered at https://aspredicted.org/gfsy-6shc.pdf.
Method
Participants and Design.
Study 5 had a 2 (PD: 
immediate PD vs. delayed PD) × 3 (store image: premium 
vs. national vs. discount) between-subjects design. 
Following our preregistration, we initially recruited 900 
participants who were then prescreened with the same cri­
terion used in studies 2 and 4. Our final sample size had 
726 Prolific participants (56.5% female, Mage ¼ 39.63) 
who were randomly assigned to the conditions and paid a 
fixed nominal payment. Web appendix E provides details 
of the stimuli, including images of how the products were 
presented across conditions.
Procedure.
The first step was to elicit an IRP from 
each participant. Specifically, we asked, “Considering the 
variety of espresso machines available on the market, how 
much do you estimate the average price for a typical 
espresso machine to be? Please base your estimate on your 
general knowledge and understanding of the market, with­
out looking up any prices (there are no right or wrong 
answers!). Use numbers only.” We also reminded partici­
pants of the difference between espresso machines and reg­
ular coffee makers.
In the second step, we described an online retailer that 
sold espresso machines. In the national retailer condition, 
14                                                                                                                                 
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
