expensive than value product categories (e.g., ramen noo­
dles, dish rags, cotton swabs). Likewise, premium products 
in a category (e.g., designer purse, haute couture) should 
be more expensive than basic products in the same 
product category (e.g., affordable handbag, fast fashion). 
Subcategory price beliefs are based on differences in attrib­
utes or attribute levels between subcategories. For example, 
espresso machines with programable settings (vs. not) 
belong to the premium subcategory. Similarly, espresso 
machines with a dual-boiler system, versus a single-boiler 
system, belong to the premium category. Consumers aggre­
gate product features and represent beliefs at the subcate­
gory level because it is more cognitively efficient, though 
it is possible for consumers to use beliefs about individual 
attributes to inform price beliefs.
Third, there are nonattribute events that are used to make 
inferences about a product’s price (e.g., advertising, exter­
nal reference prices, general economic conditions; Biswas 
and Blair 1991; Cheng and Monroe 2013). Regardless of 
the source, price beliefs can be used to construct price 
expectations when limited information is available or to 
adjust price expectations that are initially based on product 
attributes. If price beliefs are shared by consumers in a tar­
get market, these beliefs will shift the distribution of price 
expectations for the target market (figure 1; Hamilton and 
Chernev 2013).
Manufacturers and retailers can proactively influence 
price beliefs and alter consumers’ expectations about price, 
independent of the product itself. For example, premium 
retailers design their spaces (a store’s layout, fixtures, win­
dow displays, etc.) to convey an image of exclusivity, 
luxury, or meticulous quality. These actions can prompt 
shoppers to anticipate even higher prices (i.e., distribution 
D in figure 1), which will result in more unit sales at a cur­
rent OP or similar sales at a higher OP (Vigneron and 
Johnson 1999; Wiedmann, Hennings, and Siebels 2009). 
Similarly, the product mix offered by a retailer plays a cru­
cial role in creating and reinforcing price beliefs. An assort­
ment dominated by premium products signals that the 
retailer caters predominantly to an upmarket clientele, rein­
forcing the expectation of higher prices (Allard and Griffin 
2017; Simonson 1999).
Discount retailers are positioned to encourage consumers 
to believe they offer lower prices (i.e., distribution B in 
figure 1). Discount retailers design their spaces to convey 
an image of affordability, frugality, or essential quality to 
attract customers who desire or require low price points 
(Chang and Wang 2014; Grace and O’Cass 2005). 
Similarly, low-end retailers offer product assortments com­
prised primarily of “value” or “economy” alternatives to 
signal that they cater to a budget-conscious clientele 
(Simonson 1999). These actions encourage and reinforce 
inexpensive-price beliefs.
Price Delays, Price Beliefs, Price Expectations, 
and Purchase Behavior
Price expectations are a function of a weighted average 
of a product’s price history, product attributes, and price 
FIGURE 1  
DISTRIBUTIONS OF CUSTOMER PRICE EXPECTATIONS 
NOTE.–– Curve C illustrates the baseline distribution of a target market’s price expectations, derived from price history and product attributes. Curve B (D) represents 
adjustments to price expectations owing to the target market’s belief that prices will be inexpensive (expensive). E($), expected price.
4                                                                                                                                   
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
