prompted to focus more intently on the product’s inherent 
features and benefits, thereby aligning their decisions more 
closely with their true desires rather than being predomi­
nantly driven by price considerations. This perspective 
expands upon the notion of positive expectation disconfir­
mation, suggesting that delayed PD has the potential to 
enhance the congruence between consumer preferences 
and their purchase decisions.
Furthermore, it would be interesting to extend our 
research to consider competition. If prices are disclosed not 
only to consumers but also to competitors, then is it better 
for a retailer to hide them from the more “public” places of 
the purchase process (a store shelf, a landing page, etc.)? 
The answer to this question probably depends on several 
factors, including the underlying pricing policy of the 
retailer and its competitors. For instance, a company with a 
policy of matching the lowest price might benefit from post­
ing prices immediately because consumers who compare 
prices will have less friction in the shopping experience.
Finally, identifying potential moderators of the price 
delay effect warrants further investigation. Individual dif­
ferences, such as dispositional optimism or pessimism, 
could influence a consumer’s propensity to utilize price 
beliefs when updating price expectations. Similarly, price 
knowledge and confidence may mitigate the effects of 
delayed PD, as more knowledgeable consumers are likely 
less susceptible to revising their expectations during the 
delay. This implies price delay effects are less likely to 
manifest 
for 
fast-moving 
consumer 
goods, 
wherein consumers possess extensive price histories. 
Additionally, when a price delay is perceived as non-nor­
mative—deviating from standard practice in a given retail 
context—consumers may be less inclined to allow their 
price beliefs to sway their expectations, potentially attenu­
ating the effects observed in our studies.
DATA COLLECTION STATEMENT
Data from study 1 were provided by Fravega, an 
Argentinian retailer of household and tech appliances, to 
the third author. Collected in spring 2020 by the company 
under the third author’s supervision, these data were ana­
lyzed by the third author with input from the first and sixth 
authors. The post-test and alternative explanations tests for 
study 1 were conducted in February 2025 by the first 
author, who also analyzed the data. Study 2’s main study 
and pretest were conducted via Prolific in February 2025 
by the first and second authors. The post-test and alterna­
tive explanations tests were conducted online in March 
2025 by the same authors. All study 2 data were analyzed 
by the first and second authors. Data for study 3 were again 
provided by Fravega to the third author. Collected in 
December 2021 under the third author’s supervision, these 
data were analyzed by the third author with input from the 
first and sixth authors. The post-test and alternative 
explanations tests for study 3 were conducted in February 
2025 by the first author, who also analyzed the data. Study 
4’s main study and pretest were conducted via Prolific in 
February 2025 by the first and second authors. The post- 
test and alternative explanations tests were conducted in 
March 2025 by the same authors, who analyzed all tests 
and study data. Study 5’s main study and alternative 
explanations test were conducted via Prolific in March 
2025 by the first author and analyzed by the first and sec­
ond authors. The web appendix F study (i.e., study 5 proce­
dure with category-level price expectations) was conducted 
via Prolific in April 2024 by the first author and analyzed 
by the first and second authors. The web appendix G study 
(a conceptual replication of study 5) was also conducted 
via Prolific in April 2024 by the first author and analyzed 
by the first and second authors. Data for study 6 were col­
lected via Prolific in August 2024 by the first author and 
analyzed by the first and second authors with input from all 
other authors. The post-test and alternative explanations 
tests for study 6 were conducted in March 2025 by the first 
author and analyzed by the first and second authors. The 
raw data for all studies, code (SPSS for laboratory studies 
and STATA/R for field studies), qualtrics survey files (. 
qsf), and preregistration documents for the laboratory sur­
veys and studies are available on the OSF website (https:// 
osf.io/xt42w/).
REFERENCES
Allard, Thomas and Dale Griffin (2017), “Comparative Price and 
the Design of Effective Product Communications,” Journal 
of Marketing, 81 (5), 16–29.
Bertini, Marco, Diego Aparicio, and Aylin Aydinli (2024), “Can 
Friction Improve Your Customers’ Experiences?,” MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 65 (2), 42–7.
Biswas, Abhijit and Edward A. Blair (1991), “Contextual Effects 
of Reference Price in Retail Advertisements,” Journal of 
Marketing, 55 (3), 1–12.
Blake, Tom, Sarah Moshary, Kane Sweeney, and Steve Tadelis 
(2021), “Price Salience and Product Choice,” Marketing 
Science, 40 (4), 619–36.
Brown, Jennifer, Tanjim Hossain, and John Morgan (2010), 
“Shrouded Attributes and Information Suppression: Evidence 
From the Field,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (2), 
859–76.
Carlin, Bruce I. (2009), “Strategic Price Complexity in Retail 
Financial Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 91 (3), 
278–87.
Chang, Shu-Hao and Kai-Yu Wang (2014), “Investigating the 
Antecedents and Consequences of an Overall Store Price 
Image in Retail Settings,” Journal of Marketing Theory and 
Practice, 22 (3), 299–314.
Cheng, Lillian L. and Kent B. Monroe (2013), “An Appraisal of 
Behavioral Price Research (Part 1): Price as a Physical 
Stimulus,” AMS Review, 3 (3), 103–29.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft (2009), “Salience and 
Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic 
Review, 99 (4), 1145–77.
AFFONSO ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                      
21 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
