Concealing Prices: How Delayed Price 
Disclosure Influences Consumer Purchase 
Decisions
FELIPE M. AFFONSO 
AMIN SHIRI 
DIEGO APARICIO 
MINZHE XU 
XIANG WANG 
CHRIS JANISZEWSKI  
MARCO BERTINI 
This article presents the first systematic empirical investigation into a longstanding 
question in retail: is it better to display prices upfront or reveal them later in the pur­
chase process? Two large-scale field studies demonstrate that delayed price dis­
closure can either increase or decrease sales. Supporting laboratory studies reveal 
that one plausible explanation is that a price delay allows price beliefs to shift con­
sumers’ internal reference prices upward or downward, creating either positive or 
negative price expectation disconfirmations when prices are revealed. When con­
sumers anticipate prices should be expensive (e.g., from premium brands or 
upscale stores), a price delay allows price beliefs to shift price expectations 
upward, making purchases more likely when prices are revealed. Conversely, 
when consumers anticipate prices should be inexpensive (e.g., sales events or dis­
count stores), a price delay allows price beliefs to shift price expectations down­
ward, making purchases less likely when prices are revealed. Our findings offer 
retailers actionable insights on when to reveal prices to customers. In doing so, the 
authors contribute to the literature on price obfuscation and challenge the conven­
tional wisdom that shopping experiences should always minimize friction.
Keywords: Price disclosure, price obfuscation, consumer expectations, pricing, 
retailing
Felipe M. Affonso (felipe.affonso@okstate.edu) is Assistant Professor 
of Marketing, Spears School of Business, Oklahoma State University, 316 
Business Building, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA. Amin Shiri (amin. 
shiri@tamu.edu) is a doctoral student in Marketing, Mays Business 
School, Texas A&M University, Wehner 220, College Station, TX 77843, 
USA. Diego Aparicio (daparicio@iese.edu) is Assistant Professor of 
Marketing, IESE Business School, University of Navarra, Carrer d’Arnus i 
de Gari, 3–7, Barcelona, 08034 Catalonia, Spain. Minzhe Xu 
(minzhexu@iastate.edu) is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Ivy College 
of Business, Iowa State University, 2350 Gerdin Business Building, 2167 
Union Drive, Ames, IA 50011, USA. Xiang Wang (xiang.wang@ln.edu. 
hk) is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Department of Marketing and 
International Business, Lingnan University, 8 Castle Peak Road, Tuen 
Mun, Hong Kong. Chris Janiszewski (chris.janiszewski@warrington.ufl. 
edu) is the Russell Berrie Eminent Scholar Chair and Professor of 
Marketing, Warrington College of Business, University of Florida, 255B 
Stuzin Hall, Gainesville FL 32611, USA. Marco Bertini (marco. 
bertini@esade.edu) is Professor of Marketing, Esade—Universitat Ramon 
Llull, 08172 Sant Cugat del Valles, Spain. Address all correspondence to 
Felipe M. Affonso. The first three authors contributed equally to this 
research. Diego Aparicio gratefully acknowledges Juan Martin Romero 
and Alejandro Fogarolli for their insightful feedback. Diego Aparicio has 
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and 
Innovation Programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant 
Agreement No. 892142. Supplementary materials are included in the web 
appendix accompanying the online version of this article.    
Editors: Andrew T. Stephen and Stephen A. Spiller  
Associate Editor: Dan R. Schley  
Advance Access publication September 2, 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of Consumer Research, Inc. All rights reserved.  
For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the 
Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.  Vol. 00  2025 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051 
1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
