A 
classic retail tactic is to withhold prices from con­
sumers. Window displays have long invited passersby 
to “ask inside for prices.” Print catalogs prompted readers 
to “contact us for prices.” More recently, e-commerce web­
sites urge shoppers to “add to cart to see price.” Despite its 
persistence, businesses continue to debate whether 
“obfuscating” prices—defined as “actions that firms take 
to make price search more costly” (Ellison 2016, 288)— 
enhances or harms sales performance. Some proponents 
argue that “it is downright stupid to show your prices” 
alongside products (Silva 2018), claiming consumers must 
first internalize a product’s value before being exposed to 
its cost. Conversely, opponents insist that retailers should 
be forthcoming and “own” the price conversation (Hubspot 
2017), reasoning that delaying price disclosure (PD) creates 
confusion, eroding trust and drawing unwanted attention to 
cost.
Prior research has found that obfuscating a part of the 
price can be beneficial for retailers, especially when 
enough consumers in a market are unwilling or unable to 
determine what they should pay. For instance, advertising a 
low base price while obscuring ancillary charges (e.g., 
delivery costs, service fees, taxes) can lead to increased 
sales compared to disclosing the total cost upfront (Chiles 
2021). This occurs because some consumers commit to the 
purchase 
before 
seeing 
the 
additional 
charges, 
whereas others disregard the charges once revealed. 
However, academic research has largely overlooked the 
impact of concealing the entire price of a product.
We propose that delaying PD influences sales by ampli­
fying the impact of price beliefs on expected prices. 
Consumers hold pre-existing price beliefs based on product 
type (e.g., discount, luxury), quality level (e.g., low, high), 
retailer (e.g., discount, premium), or the economic environ­
ment (e.g., high inflation). When the disclosure of a price 
is delayed, consumers rely more heavily on these pre- 
existing beliefs to form price expectations. Consequently, 
expensive-price beliefs (inexpensive-price beliefs) shift 
price expectations upward (downward), making an offer 
price (OP) seem more (less) appealing once the price is 
revealed, thus increasing (decreasing) the likelihood of pur­
chase. Consistent with these hypotheses, we show that 
delayed (vs. immediate) PD increases purchase intentions 
when consumers hold expensive-price beliefs. We demon­
strate this effect in a field study at the online store of a 
mainstream retailer (study 1) and in laboratory experiments 
in which the product is premium (study 2) or sold by a pre­
mium retailer (study 5). We also show that delayed (vs. 
immediate) PD decreases purchase intentions when con­
sumers hold inexpensive-price beliefs. We demonstrate this 
effect in a field study investigating the sales promotions of 
a mainstream retailer (study 3) and in laboratory experi­
ments in which the product is on deal (study 4) or sold by a 
discount retailer (study 5). We also test a practical 
boundary condition of our effects: the disclosure of a mini­
mum advertised price (MAP) policy as a reason for delay­
ing the price, which moderates the effect of a delayed price 
(study 6).
Our research offers three key contributions. First, our 
research offers retailers insights into optimal PD timing, 
moving beyond the reliance on anecdotes and post hoc jus­
tifications that have previously dominated the debate. 
Second, it extends the price obfuscation literature by exam­
ining the understudied tactic of full price concealment and 
revealing its unique effect on shifting price expectations. 
Contrary to the common belief that obfuscation is univer­
sally beneficial, our findings demonstrate predictable situa­
tions in which it is detrimental. Finally, our findings 
engage with the broader management conversation about 
friction in the customer journey. Contrary to the prevailing 
advice to pursue “zero-friction” experiences—as exempli­
fied by the vision for retail by Facebook (2023)—our stud­
ies show that introducing specific forms of friction 
(delaying PD) can be positive.
PRICE OBFUSCATION
Obfuscating Ancillary Charges
Price obfuscation has been studied through both theoreti­
cal and empirical research. Theoretically, hidden sur­
charges can be used to exploit “vulnerable” consumers 
who may intentionally or unintentionally underestimate the 
actual cost of a product. This exploitation arises from sev­
eral factors: consumers within a market exhibit varying 
degrees of sensitivity to price differences (Ellison 2005), 
some demonstrate either myopia or sophistication regard­
ing future expenses (Carlin 2009; Gabaix and Laibson 
2006), individual differences in search costs exist (Ellison 
and Wolitzky 2012), and some consumers may simply be 
confused by obfuscation (Chioveanu and Zhou 2013). 
Despite the differing approaches to modeling consumer 
behavior, these studies consistently conclude that firms 
benefit from concealing prices.
Similarly, empirical studies on price obfuscation have 
consistently shown that “dripping” ancillary charges later 
in the purchase process, rather than disclosing them 
upfront, increases demand (Blake et al. 2021; Brown, 
Hossain, and Morgan 2010; Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 
2009; Goldin and Homonoff 2013; Hossain and Morgan 
2006; 
Morwitz, 
Greenleaf, 
and 
Johnson 
1998). 
Specifically, in online shopping contexts, research indi­
cates that starting eBay auctions with low opening prices 
and high shipping fees generates more bidders and higher 
revenue compared to bundling the base price and shipping 
fees (Hossain and Morgan 2006). The authors suggest that 
obfuscation exploits consumers’ tendency to downplay sur­
charges. Further, eBay sellers have been shown to capture 
2                                                                                                                                   
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
