immediate price) will increase sales. This field study was 
conducted in the online store of Fravega, an Argentinian 
retailer.2 Fravega is a mid-tier retailer of household appli­
ances and technology products, similar to Best Buy in the 
United States. Privately held Fravega had estimated sales 
of $2.3 billion in 2024 ($188 million in e-commerce). 
Fravega established its online channel in 2014 and rou­
tinely conducts up to five online A/B tests per month. This 
partnership provided us with a real-world setting to test our 
hypothesis.
In 2020, the year these data were collected, the inflation 
rate in Argentina was 42%. Thus, consumers’ price beliefs 
associated with Fravega (i.e., mid-tier retailer), the product 
category and product line (see below), and the economic 
environment were likely expensive-price beliefs.
Method
Design and Data.
The field study had two conditions: 
(1) immediate PD, with prices displayed alongside the 
products, and (2) delayed PD, with prices displayed only 
after a query was made (i.e., after a product was clicked 
on). In collaboration with the retailer, the experiment was 
conducted over an eight-week period (56 days) during the 
spring of 2020. The data and code are available on the 
OSF.
Procedure.
Study 1 involved electric kettles (26 
options) and espresso coffee machines (18 options). The 
procedure is illustrated in figure 3 using English language 
materials for espresso machines. Prospective customers 
who browsed either category saw a “thumbnail” for each 
product featuring an image and short description of each 
product. In the immediate PD condition, prices appeared in 
the thumbnails (see the four products on the left side of the 
display in figure 3). In the delayed PD condition, the pic­
tures of the products and descriptions were identical, but 
the prices were omitted (see the four products in the center 
of the display in figure 3). If shoppers clicked on a product, 
in either condition, they were directed to the retailer’s 
standard product page, which provided additional details 
on features and attributes, provided the price, and displayed 
an “add to cart” button (see the right side of the display in 
figure 3). Thus, all participants had to advance to the stand­
ard product page before they could add a product to their 
cart. Purchase behavior was recorded.
The retailer was responsible for implementing the A/B 
test. The retailer uses the VTEX platform to manage its 
e-commerce business. The VTEX platform supports A/B 
testing and can direct web traffic, at random, to one of the 
two experimental conditions. The platform has the follow­
ing advantages: (1) random assignment to condition, (2) 
the ability to store experimental assignment information in 
browser cookies so a returning shopper using the same 
device can be reassigned to the same experimental condi­
tion, and (3) an ability to record customer behaviors during 
the shopping journey. A disadvantage of the platform is it 
uses simple random assignment (i.e., each participant who 
enters an A/B test has a 50/50 chance of being assigned to 
a condition); hence, there will be unequal sample sizes 
across conditions. A second disadvantage is it cannot retain 
experimental condition information if a consumer switches 
devices (e.g., the first visit was on a cell phone and the sec­
ond visit was on a laptop).
Retailer Data Organization.
The data were organized 
by day and experimental condition, collapsed over products 
and product categories. Thus, the data set consisted of sales 
metrics from two experimental conditions over eight weeks 
(n ¼ 112). The retailer also recorded data on the volume of 
web visits. The average number of unique daily visitors 
was 267 to either of the product categories in the 
immediate PD condition and 280 to either of the product 
categories in the delayed PD condition. There was no infor­
mation on whether any customers visited both product cate­
gories on a given day, but the retailer believed this was 
very unlikely.
Measures.
In order to assess the robustness of the effect 
of the price delay manipulation, three unique shopping 
behaviors were analyzed. The first dependent measure was 
a binary daily purchase indicator, a useful metric for a 
retailer that operates in a high inflation environment. This 
measure assessed whether a sale occurred in either product 
category on that day. The binary daily purchase indicator 
was set to 1 if a purchase in either category took place on 
date t, or to 0 otherwise. The second measure was daily 
units sold (log transformed). Daily units sold refers to the 
total number of units purchased in an experimental condi­
tion on a given day. The third measure was daily sales rev­
enue (log transformed). Daily sales revenue refers to the 
sum of the sale prices (in Argentinian pesos) for the units 
sold in a condition on a day. In addition, we calculated the 
bounce rate (the percentage of sessions ending after a sin­
gle page view with no clicks to a standard product page) to 
check whether the delayed PD was more interesting to 
shoppers (i.e., more shoppers clicked through to standard 
product page).
Results
We estimate the model DMi, t ¼ α þ βPD þ δt þ εi, t for 
each dependent measure, where DMi, t denotes the depend­
ent measure in experimental condition i on day t, PD is an 
indicator variable for the manipulation of PD equal to 0 in 
the immediate PD condition and 1 in the delayed PD condi­
tion, and δt denotes time fixed effects.3 Fixed-time effects 
2
Website: https://www.fravega.com/
3
There are 112 observations in the data (2 conditions × 56 days). 
With 55 control variables for days, 1 degree of freedom (df) for the 
constant, and 1 df for the treatment, there are therefore 55 
AFFONSO ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                        
7 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
