¼ 16.82, p < .001), suggesting that expensive-price beliefs 
influenced price expectations in the delayed PD condition.
Alternative Explanations.
It is possible the withholding 
prices encouraged consumers to make favorable inferences 
about product quality or the retailer. Using a procedure 
similar to study 2’s (condition: immediate PD vs. delayed 
PD), we asked 235 people interested in espresso machines 
about perceived product quality and customer service 
expectations (see web appendix B for details). There was 
no effect of condition on perceived product quality (F(1, 
233) ¼ 0.915, p ¼ .340) and customer service expectations 
(F(1, 233) ¼ 0.354, p ¼ .552).
Discussion
Study 2 provided evidence for hypothesis 1a and hypoth­
esis 1b. In a setting in which information about the product 
and the context of the purchase prompted consumers to 
believe prices would be expensive, delayed PD increased 
consumers’ likelihood of buying the product. The effect 
was mediated by favorable price expectation disconfirma­
tion, suggesting that the expensive-price belief exerted a 
stronger influence on expected prices when the price was 
delayed (see distributions D and E in figure 2).
STUDY 3: DELAYING PRICE IN A SALES 
FLYER REDUCES SALES
Study 3 tested hypothesis 2a—that when consumers 
have inexpensive-price beliefs, a delayed price (vs. an 
immediate price) will decrease sales. Study 3 was con­
ducted in cooperation with Fravega in December 2021. In 
this instance, the retailer emailed a daily sales flyer (on 
seven consecutive days) to a database of over 700,000 cur­
rent (high-potential customers in the customer database) 
and prospective customers. Similar to many email sales 
flyers, the flyer featured a limited selection of products 
(from 8 to 12 unique products each day, changing each day 
over the seven-day week, resulting in 70 unique advertised 
products) offered at a discount. To help communicate the 
opportunity for a deal, the first word of the email subject 
line included the word “Deals” or similar terminology. 
Thus, the price beliefs associated with the purchase oppor­
tunity were likely inexpensive. The influence of 
inexpensive-price beliefs on price expectations, when there 
are price delays, will be verified in a post-test.
Method
Procedure.
The field study was conducted using a sales 
flyer that the retailer regularly emailed. Management had 
historical evidence that the flyer was a powerful tool for 
driving engagement and promoting transactions. On this 
occasion, the retailer emailed the sales flyer on seven con­
secutive days to 771,583 selected addresses in its database. 
The subject line of the seven email flyers included the 
word “Deals” or similar terminology, indicating a promo­
tional shopping context. Each of the seven flyers advertised 
between 8 and 12 products from various categories (electric 
kettles, video consoles, headphones, microwaves, blenders, 
speakers, etc.), all offered at a promotional price. The 
emails contained thumbnail product pictures with a format 
similar to that used in study 1. Examples of the flyers are 
shown in web appendix C.
Email recipients were randomly assigned to the 
immediate PD condition, in which products and prices 
appeared together on the thumbnail in the sales flyer, or to 
the delayed PD condition, in which prices were omitted 
from the thumbnail in the sales flyer. In both conditions, a 
click on the thumbnail in the flyer sent the participant to 
the standard product page that provided details on features 
and attributes, listed the price, and displayed an “add to 
cart” button. In this experiment, 53.7% of consumers 
clicked on at least one product in at least one email, result­
ing in 4.096% of links clicked (i.e., on average, people 
clicked on 2.867 of the 70 advertised products).
Measures.
The measures were similar to those used in 
study 1, except that they were (1) at the individual 
level, and (2) aggregated over the seven-day period. The 
binary weekly purchase indicator was set to 1 if a con­
sumer made at least one purchase during the week, or to 0 
if the consumer made no purchase during the week. Thus, 
it is the percentage of consumers who made a purchase. 
The weekly units sold (log transformed) measured how 
many total units were sold to a customer during the week. 
The weekly sales revenue (log transformed) measured the 
sales (in Argentinian pesos) revenue from the items pur­
chased by a consumer during the week.
Data.
The experiment was run during December 2021, 
and the data refer to email newsletters sent to 771,583 cus­
tomers. The data and analyses code are posted on the OSF.
Results
We estimate the model DMi ¼ α þ βPD þ εi, where 
DMi denotes the dependent measure of consumer i, and PD 
is an indicator variable for the manipulation of PD equal to 
0 in the immediate PD condition and 1 in the delayed PD 
condition. Table 2 summarizes the results. Precision is 
shown at four digits because the parameter estimates are 
small.
Binary Weekly Purchase Indicator.
Relative to the 
immediate PD, the delayed PD decreased the percentage of 
customers who made a purchase during the week 
(Mimmediate ¼ 2.6075%, Mdelayed ¼ 2.3101%, β ¼ −0.2977, 
SE ¼ 0.0352, t(771581) ¼ −8.43, p < .001, r2 ¼ 0.0001).
Weekly Log Units Sold.
Relative to the immediate PD, 
the delayed PD decreased the weekly log units sold 
AFFONSO ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                      
11 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
