a price below the MAP, but they can only reveal it once 
consumers advance to the shopping cart—wherein the price 
is considered part of the sales agreement rather than a pro­
motional hook. Consequently, many retailers that delay PD 
because of an MAP policy prompt consumers to “Add to 
cart to see the price.” Whereas some US retailers in this sit­
uation simply delay PD, other retailers, including Academy 
Sports þ Outdoors and Walmart, explain, “Price is too low 
to show,” and attribute it directly to the MAP policy, pro­
viding reasons for the price delay (see web appendix H for 
examples).
The goal of this experiment was to test the possibility 
that attributing delayed PD to an MAP policy moderates its 
effect on purchase intentions. When consumers have 
expensive-price beliefs, an assumption that will be con­
firmed in a post-test to be discussed later, a price delay 
increases purchase intention (hypothesis 1a) owing to a 
favorable price expectation disconfirmation (hypothesis 
1b). Yet, attributing the delayed disclosure to an MAP pol­
icy may signal to consumers that the price is likely low, 
effectively replacing an expensive-price belief with an 
inexpensive-price 
belief. 
When 
consumers 
have 
inexpensive-price beliefs, a price delay decreases purchase 
intention (hypothesis 2a) owing to an unfavorable price 
expectation disconfirmation (hypothesis 2b). Thus, attribut­
ing a price delay to an MAP policy can make the beneficial 
effects of a price delay (when the MAP policy is not dis­
closed) become detrimental (when the MAP policy is 
disclosed).
Method
Participants and Design.
We recruited 322 Prolific 
participants. We randomly assigned participants to one of 
three PD conditions (immediate PD, delayed PD, and 
delayed PD with MAP policy). In line with the preregistra­
tion (https://aspredicted.org/kz3n-gzzd.pdf), we removed 
22 participants who failed the attention check, resulting in 
an effective sample of 300 (45.7% female, Mage ¼ 38.36).
Procedure.
We explained, “In this survey, we want 
you to imagine you want to purchase a robot vacuum 
cleaner. In this scenario, you are browsing through a vari­
ety of robot vacuum cleaners on a website. At some point, 
you found a robot vacuum cleaner that interested you. 
Click the arrow button to continue.” Web appendix H pro­
vides details of the stimuli.
On the next page, participants previewed the product 
“iRobot Roomba Combo i5þ
Self-Emptying Robot 
Vacuum & Mop,” which included the number of reviews 
and shipping date. Here, we randomly assigned participants 
to one of three PD conditions. Participants in the 
immediate PD condition saw the product’s price ($349.99) 
and an “Add to cart” button. In this study, the product’s 
price was based on the real product’s price at the time the 
experiment was run rather than a pretest. Participants in the 
delayed PD condition did not see the price, and the button 
read, “See price in cart.” Finally, participants in the 
delayed PD with MAP policy did not see its price, saw the 
“See price in cart” button, and saw a mouseover element in 
the shape of a question mark that read, “Please add this 
item to your cart to see the price. Because the price is 
below the manufacturer’s minimum advertised price, we 
are unable to show it here.” We then told all 
participants, “You decided to see more information about 
the product. Click the Next button to continue.” On the fol­
lowing page, we provided additional product information. 
This information, which included a highlight of the main 
features, a one-paragraph description, and zoomed product 
pictures, was taken directly from Best Buy. Participants in 
the two delayed PD conditions still did not receive the 
price. After processing the additional details, participants 
returned to the product previews and read, “After some 
consideration, you decide to add the product to your shop­
ping cart. Please click the next button to see the product in 
your shopping cart.” Then, on the final page, participants 
viewed the shopping cart containing the product, its price, 
and the cart subtotal. This was the first time that partici­
pants in the delayed PD conditions saw the price.
Below the shopping cart, we asked, “If you were in this 
scenario, how likely would you be to purchase the option 
in your shopping cart (i.e., checkout)?” (1 ¼ “not likely at 
all” to 7 ¼ “extremely likely”). To measure price expecta­
tion disconfirmation, we then asked, “Consider your shop­
ping experience, the product, and its price ($349.99). How 
would you describe your price expectations relative to its 
current price?” (1 ¼ “I expected a much lower price than 
its current price,” to 4 ¼ “I expected a price equal or simi­
lar to its current price,” to 7 ¼ “I expected a much higher 
price than its current price”).
Results
Purchase Likelihood.
First, a three-cell ANOVA on 
purchase likelihood shows a main effect of PD (F(2, 297) 
¼ 17.07, p < .001, η2
p ¼ 0.103). Specifically, participants 
were more likely to buy the vacuum cleaner in the delayed 
PD condition (M ¼ 5.01, SD ¼ 1.27) than in the immediate 
PD (M ¼ 4.43, SD ¼ 1.70; F(1, 297) ¼ 6.36, p ¼ .012, η2
p 
¼ 0.021) or delayed PD MAP (M ¼ 3.67, SD ¼ 1.85; F(1, 
297) ¼ 33.94, p < .001, η2
p ¼ 0.103) conditions (figure 6). 
In contrast, participants were less likely to buy the vacuum 
cleaner in the delayed PD MAP condition than in the 
immediate PD condition (F(1, 297) ¼ 10.92, p < .001, η2
p 
¼ 0.035).
Price Expectation Disconfirmation.
Second, a similar 
ANOVA on price expectation disconfirmation reveals a 
main effect of PD (F(2, 297) ¼ 18.76, p < .001, η2
p ¼
0.112). Specifically, participants reported higher scores in 
the delayed PD condition (M ¼ 4.52, SD ¼ 1.34) than in 
the immediate PD (M ¼ 4.02, SD ¼ 1.20; F(1, 297) ¼
18                                                                                                                                 
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
