more revenue by shrouding shipping fees but not when 
they are disclosed upfront (Brown et al. 2010). Similarly, a 
field experiment on StubHub, a secondary marketplace for 
event tickets, showed that consumers were more likely to 
select and purchase more expensive tickets when manda­
tory fees were initially hidden (Blake et al. 2021). Analysis 
of click-stream data by the same authors also indicated that 
price shrouding hindered price comparisons.
Beyond the digital world, in physical retail settings, 
research indicates that disclosing a product’s sales tax on 
the shelf, rather than at the cashier, reduces sales by 
approximately 8% (Chetty et al. 2009). This reduction was 
attributed to increased salience of the sales tax rather than 
consumer ignorance about taxes. This finding has been 
replicated and further explored, revealing that low-income 
consumers pay closer attention to taxes levied at the regis­
ter compared to high-income consumers (Goldin and 
Homonoff 2013). In laboratory settings, studies have 
shown that separating a buyer’s premium from the product 
price increases demand (Morwitz et al. 1998). This is partly 
due to consumers anchoring on the base price and insuffi­
ciently adjusting for the premium when calculating the 
total price.1
Obfuscating an Entire Price
To our knowledge, there are only two articles that study 
the obfuscation of an entire price. First, Lynch and Ariely 
(2000) manipulated price “usability” such that participants 
in the high usability condition saw prices upfront and could 
sort products according to this information, whereas those 
in the low usability condition saw prices at a later stage 
(and, therefore, had no sorting option). They found that 
“increasing price usability had no reliable effect” on price 
sensitivity (Lynch and Ariely 2000, 100), but this conclu­
sion relied on one laboratory experiment with a sample of 
72 participants for an eight-cell between-subjects design. 
Second, Karmarkar, Shiv, and Knutson (2015) used func­
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study the 
relationship between product primacy (product information 
before price information) or price primacy (price informa­
tion before product information) and brain activity. 
Although the authors found that product primacy shifted 
the focus of participants from assessing monetary worth to 
assessing product liking, the effect on purchase intentions 
was unclear. In addition, although price primacy has been 
demonstrated in laboratory settings, it is uncommon in 
real-world contexts—unlike the obfuscation of an entire 
price, which is frequently observed in practice.
Research Opportunity
In summary, the price obfuscation debate—whether 
businesses should reveal prices upfront or later in the pur­
chase process—spans various sectors and retail formats, 
generates conflicting opinions, yet it lacks substantial 
empirical evidence. The existing literature on price obfus­
cation highlights two key avenues for new research. First, 
whereas all obfuscation strategies inherently delay price 
discovery, the practice of delaying the disclosure of an 
entire price is sufficiently common to merit focused inves­
tigation. Second, if delayed PD indeed alters purchase 
behavior, current explanations within the price obfuscation 
literature may be insufficient. When businesses withhold 
the full price, it is unlikely that consumers precommit to a 
purchase or misrepresent price information once revealed. 
Therefore, a deeper examination of this tactic is warranted.
PRICE EXPECTATIONS
Price expectations, also known as internal reference prices 
(IRPs), serve as benchmarks against which consumers evalu­
ate OPs (Kalwani et al. 1990; Monroe 1973; Winer 1986). 
These expectations are shaped by three primary factors: (1) 
knowledge of the product’s price history, (2) product attrib­
utes, and (3) price beliefs. Knowledge about the price history 
of the product helps a consumer understand the value a seller, 
and the marketplace, assign to a product as well as price 
trends (Kalyanaram and Winer 1995; Monroe 1973; Winer 
1986). Product attribute levels help a consumer form price 
expectations when price history is unavailable (Shirai and 
Meyer 1997). For example, a first-time home buyer knows 
that the neighborhood, square footage, and quality of internal 
features (e.g., flooring, cabinets, fixtures) influence price. 
Price beliefs influence the construction of, or adjustments to, 
price expectations (Hamilton 2024). In this discussion, we 
focus on how price beliefs influence price expectations.
Price Beliefs
Price beliefs are typically directional in that a consumer 
can believe a product is going to be inexpensive or expen­
sive. There are three primary sources of price beliefs. First, 
there are beliefs about a retailer’s price image (Hamilton and 
Chernev 2013). Consumers can use the retailer’s nonprice 
characteristics (e.g., ambiance, decor, and location) and pric­
ing policy (e.g., price advertising, price points, promotional 
history) to form beliefs that the retailer has inexpensive (e.g., 
Walmart) or expensive (e.g., Nordstrom) prices.
Second, there are price beliefs about categories or subca­
tegories of products (Cheng and Monroe 2013; Mazumdar, 
Raj, and Sinha 2005). For example, premium product cate­
gories (e.g., diamonds, caviar, yachts) should be more 
1
There is far less research on the long-run effect of price obfuscation. 
In one article, Santana, Dallas, and Morwitz (2020) find that self- 
justification and mistaken perceptions about additional search costs, or 
potential gains from switching sellers, made initial decisions exces­
sively sticky. Yet, Chiles (2021) argues that reputational concerns 
counteract the incentive to companies to obfuscate prices especially if 
consumers can punish deceptive behavior. Specifically, Chiles (2021)
finds that shrouding resort fees lowers guest ratings in the US hotel 
industry.
AFFONSO ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                        
3 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
