beliefs. Price beliefs have a stronger influence on price 
expectations when there is uncertainty about how to assign 
value to product attributes, such as when there is a limited 
history of purchasing and/or using a product (Shirai and 
Meyer 1997). Price beliefs can influence the anticipated 
performance of individual attributes (Plassmann et al. 
2008; Rao 2005) or exert a general, halo-like influence on 
the expected price (Hamilton 2024). Price beliefs can also 
exert a stronger influence on price expectations when con­
textual factors make these beliefs more salient, as is the 
case when a price is absent (i.e., delayed) and consumers 
must infer pricing information.
When the price is delayed, as opposed to disclosed imme­
diately, price beliefs can exert a greater influence in shaping 
price expectations. In other words, a customer’s belief about 
whether a price will be inexpensive or expensive has a sig­
nificantly larger impact on their price expectations when 
the price is delayed rather than disclosed immediately. This 
occurs because the absence of price information creates a 
knowledge gap that consumers fill by relying on their pre- 
existing beliefs about what the price should be.
The predicted influence of price beliefs and price delays 
on price expectations is illustrated in figure 2. The top 
panel shows a situation in which the belief is that prices 
will be expensive. This belief shifts the distribution of con­
sumers’ price expectations from distribution C (i.e., base­
line price expectation based on price history and product 
attributes) to distribution D (i.e., adjustment for expensive- 
price belief). A price delay amplifies the relative weight of 
the expensive-price belief in the price expectation judg­
ment, further shifting consumer price expectations to distri­
bution E (i.e., amplification of the expensive-price belief). 
The bottom panel of figure 2 shows the opposite effect. 
When the belief is that prices will be inexpensive, the dis­
tribution of consumers’ price expectations shifts from dis­
tribution C (i.e., baseline price expectation based on price 
history and product attributes) to distribution B (i.e., adjust­
ment for inexpensive-price belief). A price delay amplifies 
the relative weight of the inexpensive-price belief in the 
price expectation judgment so that the price expectation 
shifts from distribution B to distribution A (i.e., amplifica­
tion of the inexpensive-price belief).
Shifts in price expectations should influence consumer pur­
chase behavior and, by extension, the overall sales in a target 
market. To illustrate, consider the top panel of figure 2. 
When an expensive-price belief shifts consumers’ price 
expectations from distribution C to distribution D, more con­
sumers will have expectations exceeding the OP. When con­
sidering the OP, these consumers should experience a 
favorable price expectation disconfirmation (i.e., [mean 
expected price of all target market consumers in the presence 
of expensive-price beliefs minus offer price] is positive) 
because the OP is below their expected price (Kalyanaram 
and Winer 1995). Consumers with a favorable price expecta­
tion disconfirmation should be more willing to purchase the 
product because the OP is better than expected. A price delay, 
which further shifts price expectations to distribution E, 
should increase the number of consumers with a favorable 
expectation disconfirmation even further, leading to higher 
sales. Of course, this prediction assumes homogeneity in con­
sumer price beliefs—specifically, that all consumers in the 
target market share expensive-price beliefs, as consumers 
with inexpensive price beliefs would shift their price expecta­
tions downward.
Similar predictions can be made in the lower panel of 
figure 2: inexpensive-price beliefs should shift price 
expectations downward (distribution B), and even more so 
with a price delay (distribution A). This results in fewer 
consumers willing to purchase the product, as more of 
them will experience an unfavorable price expectation dis­
confirmation. Again, heterogeneity in price beliefs will 
weaken this effect.
The hypotheses represented in figure 2 are summarized 
below. 
H1: When consumers believe a price will be expensive, a 
delayed price (compared to an immediate price):
a. will increase purchase intention and/or sales; 
b. because of a more favorable price expectation dis­
confirmation (mediator). 
H2: When consumers believe a price will be inexpensive, a 
delayed price (compared to an immediate price):
a. will decrease purchase intention and/or sales; 
b. because of a more unfavorable price expectation 
disconfirmation (mediator). 
OVERVIEW OF STUDIES
We test the hypotheses as follows. Study 1 is a field study 
that tests hypothesis 1a (i.e., a price delay increases sales) at 
the online store of a mainstream consumer retailer. A post- 
test is used to support the assumption that shoppers had 
expensive-price beliefs. Study 2 is a laboratory study that 
shows hypothesis 1b is one plausible explanation for the 
effects observed in the field. When consumers have 
expensive-price beliefs, a price delay increases purchase 
intent because consumers experience a more favorable price 
expectation disconfirmation. Study 3 is a field study that tests 
hypothesis 2a (i.e., a price delay decreases sales) using 
responses to a national retailer’s email promotional appeals. 
A post-test is used to support the assumption that shoppers 
had inexpensive-price beliefs. Study 4 is a laboratory study 
that shows hypothesis 2b is one plausible explanation for the 
effects observed in the field. When consumers have 
inexpensive-price beliefs, a price delay decreases purchase 
intent because consumers experience a more unfavorable 
price expectation disconfirmation. Study 5 is a laboratory 
AFFONSO ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                        
5 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcr/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jcr/ucaf051/8245829 by St. Bonaventure University user on 16 April 2026
